Hello and welcome back to the course on Tablo.
And in today's tutorial we're talking about data blending.
It's a very exciting and at the same time controversial topic and Tablo.
And that's because data blending is often very underestimated.
It is a feature that is not often used but at the same time it is very powerful and should be used more
and more over at the beginning it might be a bit difficult to distinguish between joining data and blending
data.
But don't worry today we will clarify all of that and we'll put everything back in its place so that
you can comfortably use and take full advantage of these powerful features both joining and blending
data.
So to start off with we're going to need a browser.
If you go to superdog assigns dot com slash Tablo and then you scroll down to section number five joining
and blending data just download the very first file which is airline comparison.
So we'll just say that.
There we go.
And now just bring this file up airline comparison hand as you can see here.
We've got two tabs.
The first tab has revenue for our airline number one and it's split by period financial year 2015 and
financial year 2016 and is split by multiple regions.
And the second tab has revenue for airline number 2.
It is also split by year and region as you can see airline number two operates in less regions.
And another thing to note is that in the first tab the year's cold period and then the second tab the
year is called the year.
So you'll see why that's important in a few minutes.
So I'm just going to close that and we're going to open up a new tablet workbook.
Okay.
And now we're going to connect our Excel file airline comparison.
There it is.
We're going to connect to the first tab here.
So that's done now.
We're going to create another connection and it'll be the same Excel file but now we will connect to
the second tab.
Now if we go to our sheet one you will see here two daughter connections and they represent the two
different tabs in our Excel workbook.
So what we're going to do now is we'll start visualizing airline number one.
We want to see how the revenue is split by region for instance.
So we'll ignore year for now we'll just some of the revenue for the two years.
And as you can see here it's broken down by region now and we can see how the revenue changes from region
to region.
Now what we want to do is we want to add airline number two to this viz..
So if we go to the second data source right away here you can see this orange line on the left and you
can see this link ikan which tells us that Tablo is prepared to blend the data for us now.
So this is where we get to the topic of blending what is a blend.
Well remember how previously in one of the tutorials before this we created a joint for our daughter
so here in the data source we connected some different sources of data.
Like for instance like that we put in another element of data here and we created an inner join.
And then so we prepared all of the data before we actually worked with it in our workbooks.
Well now we haven't done that but at the same time Tablo allows us to do that on the fly while we're
working with workbooks.
And that is called data blending and blending is kind of like a smart choice.
So let's have a bit more of a play around with it and see how it works what we're going to do now is
going to drag revenue for the second airline also into our homes right away.
Now you can see that we have two elements in our Brazil Zeshan.
We've got the first set of bars and the second set of bars which represents the second airline.
And also it's important to note that here in our control panel we've got two main elements so this these
controls are for this airline and these controls are for this airline and these bars.
And also you can control all of them through this feature here so let me just show you an example if
I want to change the color for instance I can change the call for everything.
Or if I want to change something for this other bar charts so just one of them for instance I want to
make it a line chart instead of Bartsch and I can do that and then I can go into the second bar chart
I can change something else as well I can change the color here if I want.
And things like that so we'll just cancel those changes because we don't really need them.
But keep that in mind that you can control these separately if you need to.
And if you need to control them together then you just need to click this all feature here.
So what happened here.
Well Tablo knows that it can.
It needs to join the two data sets in order to visualize them because as you can see here we're using
a region from airline number one and the revenue from airline number one.
But revenue this revenue comes from airline battue.
And that's why it's marked with this little database with a orange I can with on it.
And so Tablo needs to somehow aggregate revenue from airline to at the level of region of airline number
one.
So how does it do it.
Well tabel knows that it needs to blend the data.
Meaning that it needs to join the two data sources and how does it do it.
It goes through the region Berbel here and that's shown using this link.
So it's basically telling us that Tablo has performed a left join from between the data sets airline
number one an airline number two on the field which is called region.
So it's kind of unjoin on the fly.
So that's that's great.
And the way the region was picked up is because the name is the same so region.
Here is the same as region here and that's how Tablo understood that it needs to join on the region
feel.
But what we actually want to do is we want to visualize not only by region but also by period.
So by year so if we go back to airline number one and we take a period here and we dragged into our
rows you'll see here financial year 2015 financial year 2016.
So now one more thing we're going to do is for this chart on the left we will take some revenue we'll
hold control and we'll take it into labels and we will just format that quickly so that it's not it's
not in millions.
So there's less numbers currency just won millions.
There we go.
And then we will take this revenue and drag it onto the label for this chart.
And now we will format it here as well.
Currency just in millions and now for the whole dashboard we will format it and tell it to be ten and
bold.
OK.
So hopefully you can see that a bit better now.
Now what's happened is after we drag it out period so I'll just perform that again so I'll take peered
out and I'll drag period into rows.
You can see also drag period intro's the first airlines daughter was split into two periods so here
you can see Africa 10 million and Africa 8 million.
Asia 20 ages 16 so it is working here.
But at the same time the second airline it's not been affected by the period bearable.
It's basically what it did is just duplicated the data for the full data set instead of splitting it
into two separate periods.
Why did that happen.
Well because Tablo does not know how to connect how to connect to this period Berbel hooked to connect
the second data set to the period variable.
Because we haven't established that connection so we can fix that very easily if we go to Dahdah EDID
relationships.
Remember how we talked about joining are multiple fields Well here we've only joined on region.
You can see that that was picked up automatically.
What are we going to do now is we going to join on multiple fields and now instead of going just joining
a region we're going to join on period and year here.
So if we do that click OK.
You can see right away this has been adjusted so what that did is now Tablo is joining these two data
sets on two fields.
And this is exactly what we talked about in that example of joining when you need to join multiple fields
if you don't join in multiple fields when it is required then you will duplicate values and you will
over inflate the observations.
So in this case what happened is Tablo joined on to fields and there was a period or region and year.
Now the reason why Tablo didn't pick it up originally was because year has a different name.
So what we'll do now is I'll show you how else you could fix that problem.
So if we go to relationships and we take period out so we'll just put it back to Automattic quick.
Okay.
You see we have that problem where the values of some tier and the bells are some tears sort of being
split.
Now what we can do is we can just go to one of these data sets so here we've got period.
So how about we go to the second data set and we will here change the name so we'll rename it in sort
of year we'll call it also period.
And what you will see is that Tablo automatically right away picks up that this should be a connection.
So now Tablo knows that the names are the same.
So therefore it is joining the data on those two fields.
Oh one more thing you should know is that if you take a period out of your visualization right away
tabel no longer needs to join on that field.
It doesn't know that there is a connection here but it won't be joining on that field.
And that is because that field is no longer part of your visualization.
So you can manually switch it on if you want or switch it off but it doesn't really affect the solution
in this case because it isn't participating in this visual.
And so what that does is that Tablo actually creates this joint on the fly.
And the way it does it is bit different to the way we were doing it manually back here in data sources
when we were creating our own joint the way Tablo does these blends.
Is it actually instead of joining the dots at roll level.
It will first send queries to each of the data assets it will aggregate them so here you've got airline
one an airline too.
It will aggregate them to the level that is required at the level of granularity of the bezels action.
And then it will only join them.
So in our case for instance before joining the dots it goes into airline into the airline 1.0 set and
it looks at the data it aggregates it to the right level so in our case it's the regional level and
then it goes to the airline 2.00 said.
It aggregates the data to the region level as well.
And then it brings back the aggregated values and joins them and that is what data blending does so
it is a very very smart lift joint and you can also see that it is a live joint because here one table
is the primary table the blue one and the Oria the airline to table is actually the secondary table
which is marked with an orange mark.
And from there you can see that it's a left joint because here you can see all of the regions which
are present in airline in the airline one database.
And here you can and they're joined to the airline to database and therefore these two are blank because
they're not present in line to do so.
And finally joining blending blending is actually done on a per sheet basis.
So if I create a new sheet here you can see right away there is no more blue or primary and secondary
secondary data source which means you can create a brand new blend and let's have a look an example
here if we started creating the blend with airline too you will see that it will become the primary
data source.
So if we drag region into rows and now we drag revenue into columns and also revenue into label and
make this a bit smaller what you will see is that when we go to Arlynn one it has become now secondary
for this.
It is the secondary data source and if we take revenue and dragged into columns here what you will notice
is that there is no longer six rows actually before we do that.
We have to fix something up because some revenue is this revenue has been copied for both of the sheets
and thats not correct.
So that can be a mistake.
We need to take out revenue from here and drag using CON-TROLL revenue the correct revenue.
And so you can see that is not the database.
And so what you can see here now is the important thing is that there is not 6 rows but only 4 and that
is because there is only four regions present in the airline one data set and its a left join sorry
in the airline two daughters said because airline 2 is our primary table and this is a left join.
So theres only four regions present in the airline two data set and if you recall when we talked about
Joines when you do a left join everything that doesn't match gets discarded.
So in this case North and South America got discarded from the final resulting table and that is because
blending is a very smart but it is a left join.
So that's pretty much it.
That is how blending works and Tablo I realize that this has been a rather lengthy tutorial but it is
important to understand how blending works.
And we went through everything that is included in a blend so we talked about the primary the secondary
tables we talked about how to add our own elements to the joints or in this case period and region.
We talked about how the the blend actually works that it first aggregates a data and then it only joins
the data in your final result.
And we also looked at why the blend is actually left join and how you should be cautious of that when
you are creating your visit Alsatians.
So thats all for today.
I hope you enjoyed this tutorial and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.